README.md, before:

# Library Management System-Api

This is a Library Management System Api.

## Table of Contents

- [Toolbox](#toolbox)
- [Database Setup](#Database-Setup)
- [Setting Up the Environment](#setting-up-the-environment)
- [Redis Setup](#redis-setup)
- [Run Scripts](#run-scripts)
- [Endpoints](#endpoints)
- [Author](#Author)
- [About](#about)

## Toolbox

- Typescript
- Express
- PostgreSQL
- Redis

## Database Setup

**_PS_**: make sure you have a PostgreSQL server installed in your system. If not, refer to the PostgreSQL documentation on [www.postgresql.org](www.postgresql.org) to install the server.
<br></br>

The server application is configured to run with a Postgresql database running with the following settings:

- Host: localhost
- Port: 5432
- Database user: "postgres"
- Database name: "lib_mng_sys"
- Test database name: "lib_mng_sys_test"
- Create the database for devolpment and testing by followint the steps below.

  ![Database Diagram](/extras/DatabaseDiagram.png)

## Setting Up the Environment

1. Install the requirements and dependancies

   ```sh
   $ npm install
   ```

2. Create the database <br>

   - In the Windows Command Prompt, run the command:

   ```sh
   $ psql -U userName
   ```

   - Enter your password when prompted.

   ```sh
   $ Your_Passowrd
   ```

   - Create a PostgreSQL user:

   ```sh
   $ CREATE USER postgres WITH PASSWORD '123456';
   ```

   - Run the following commands to create the main database used for `development` and the testing one:

   ```sh
   $ CREATE DATABASE lib_mng_sys WITH ENCODING 'UTF8';
   $ CREATE DATABASE lib_mng_sys_test WITH ENCODING 'UTF8';
   ```

   - Grant all database privileges to user in both databases:

   ```sh
   $ GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE lib_mng_sys TO postgres;

   $ GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE lib_mng_sys_test TO postgres;
   ```

   - Connect to development database `lib_mng_sys` using the command:

   ```sh
   $ \c lib_mng_sys
   ```

   - Terminate the process using the following command:

   ```sh
   $ \q
   ```

## Redis Setup

### Windows 11 Installation

1. Install Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) if not already installed:

   ```sh
   wsl --install
   ```

   Follow prompts to reboot and set up a default Linux distribution, typically Ubuntu.

2. Update and upgrade `apt-get`:

   ```sh
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get upgrade
   ```

3. Install Redis Server:

   ```sh
   sudo apt-get install redis-server
   ```

4. Start and stop the Redis server as needed:

   ```sh
   sudo service redis-server start
   sudo service redis-server stop
   ```

5. Optional: Set up Redis to start automatically on Windows boot. Create a batch file in the Windows startup folder with the command:
   ```sh
   wsl sudo service redis-server start
   ```

For more detailed instructions, refer to the full guide on [Redis.com](https://redis.com/blog/install-redis-windows-11/).

### Installation on Other Platforms

For installations on platforms other than Windows 11, please refer to the official Redis documentation for specific instructions.

## Run Scripts

- Rename `.env.example` file to `.env`
- Write your PostgreSQL userName and password in `.env`

- Build the project

  ```sh
  $ npm run build
  ```

- install db-migrate npm package globally

  ```sh
  $ npm install -g db-migrate
  ```

- Migrate Database

  ```sh
  $ npm run migrate-dev-up
  ```

- Seed (It might take couple of seconds till a message get printed `Seeding completed!`)

  ```sh
  $ node migrations\seed\script.js
  ```

- Run the project

  - Host: localhost
  - Port: 3000

  ```sh
  $ npm run start
  ```

- Run tests <br>
  **_PS_**: Testing database will not be dropped after runnint the tests.

  ```sh
  $ npm run test
  ```

- To drop the `dev` or `test` database (For whatever the reason is).

  ```sh
  $ npm run drop-dev-db

  or

  $ npm run drop-test-db

  ```

## Endpoints

- Full API Documentation:
  [Go to the Documentation Page](https://documenter.getpostman.com/view/14046968/2s9YyqihQv#1cab5ea7-1cdd-4b37-9f95-e855ebc3e947)

| HTTP Method | Endpoint                                    | Description                                     | Access Control |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| POST        | `/books`                                    | Add a new book                                  | User           |
| GET         | `/books/all`                                | Retrieve all books                              | Public         |
| GET         | `/books/show/:id`                           | Retrieve a specific book by ID                  | Public         |
| GET         | `/books/search`                             | Search for a specific book                      | Public         |
| PATCH       | `/books/update/:id`                         | Update a specific book by ID                    | User           |
| DELETE      | `/books/delete/:id`                         | Delete a specific book by ID                    | User           |
| POST        | `/borrowers`                                | Register a new borrower                         | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowers/all`                            | Retrieve all borrowers                          | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowers/show/:id`                       | Retrieve a specific borrower by ID              | User           |
| PATCH       | `/borrowers/update/:id`                     | Update a specific borrower by ID                | User           |
| DELETE      | `/borrowers/delete/:id`                     | Delete a specific borrower by ID                | User           |
| POST        | `/borrowings`                               | Create a new borrowing record                   | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowings/all`                           | Retrieve all borrowing records                  | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowings/show/:id`                      | Retrieve a specific borrowing record by ID      | User           |
| PATCH       | `/borrowings/update/return/:id`             | Mark a book as returned in the borrowing record | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowings/export/overdue`                | Export overdue borrowings                       | Public         |
| GET         | `/borrowings/getOverdueBorrowings`          | Get overdue borrowing records                   | User           |
| POST        | `/users`                                    | Create a new user                               | Public         |
| POST        | `/users/authenticate`                       | Authenticate a user and return a token          | Public         |
| GET         | `/dashboard/most-borrowed-books`            | Get the most borrowed books                     | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/borrowers-with-most-borrowings` | Get borrowers with the most borrowings          | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/overdue-books`                  | Get overdue books                               | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/recent-borrowings`              | Get recent borrowings                           | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/available-checkedout`           | Compare available and checked out books         | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/late-Borrowers`                 | Get late return rate by borrower                | User           |

## Author

- Mostafa M. Abbas- (https://github.com/MostafaAbbas-git)

## About

Back-end Engineer Technical Assessment | Bosta
1/2024

Commit message:

added docker configurations
-updated readme accordingly

README.md, after:

# Library Management System-Api

This is a Library Management System Api.

## Table of Contents

- [Toolbox](#toolbox)
- [Database Setup](#Database-Setup)
- [Setting Up the Environment](#setting-up-the-environment)
- [Redis Setup](#redis-setup)
- [Run Scripts](#run-scripts)
- [Dockerization](#dockerization)
- [Endpoints](#endpoints)
- [Author](#Author)
- [About](#about)

## Toolbox

- Typescript
- Express
- PostgreSQL
- Redis

## Database Setup

**_PS_**: make sure you have a PostgreSQL server installed in your system. If not, refer to the PostgreSQL documentation on [www.postgresql.org](www.postgresql.org) to install the server.
<br></br>

The server application is configured to run with a Postgresql database running with the following settings:

- Host: localhost
- Port: 5432
- Database user: "postgres"
- Database name: "lib_mng_sys"
- Test database name: "lib_mng_sys_test"
- Create the database for devolpment and testing by followint the steps below.

  ![Database Diagram](/extras/DatabaseDiagram.png)

## Setting Up the Environment

1. Install the requirements and dependancies

   ```sh
   $ npm install
   ```

2. Create the database <br>

   - In the Windows Command Prompt, run the command:

   ```sh
   $ psql -U userName
   ```

   - Enter your password when prompted.

   ```sh
   $ Your_Passowrd
   ```

   - Create a PostgreSQL user:

   ```sh
   $ CREATE USER postgres WITH PASSWORD '123456';
   ```

   - Run the following commands to create the main database used for `development` and the testing one:

   ```sh
   $ CREATE DATABASE lib_mng_sys WITH ENCODING 'UTF8';
   $ CREATE DATABASE lib_mng_sys_test WITH ENCODING 'UTF8';
   ```

   - Grant all database privileges to user in both databases:

   ```sh
   $ GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE lib_mng_sys TO postgres;

   $ GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE lib_mng_sys_test TO postgres;
   ```

   - Connect to development database `lib_mng_sys` using the command:

   ```sh
   $ \c lib_mng_sys
   ```

   - Terminate the process using the following command:

   ```sh
   $ \q
   ```

## Redis Setup

### Windows 11 Installation

1. Install Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) if not already installed:

   ```sh
   wsl --install
   ```

   Follow prompts to reboot and set up a default Linux distribution, typically Ubuntu.

2. Update and upgrade `apt-get`:

   ```sh
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get upgrade
   ```

3. Install Redis Server:

   ```sh
   sudo apt-get install redis-server
   ```

4. Start and stop the Redis server as needed:

   ```sh
   sudo service redis-server start
   sudo service redis-server stop
   ```

5. Optional: Set up Redis to start automatically on Windows boot. Create a batch file in the Windows startup folder with the command:
   ```sh
   wsl sudo service redis-server start
   ```

For more detailed instructions, refer to the full guide on [Redis.com](https://redis.com/blog/install-redis-windows-11/).

### Installation on Other Platforms

For installations on platforms other than Windows 11, please refer to the official Redis documentation for specific instructions.

## Run Scripts

- Rename `.env.example` file to `.env`
- Write your PostgreSQL userName and password in `.env`

- Build the project

  ```sh
  $ npm run build
  ```

- install db-migrate npm package globally

  ```sh
  $ npm install -g db-migrate
  ```

- Migrate Database

  ```sh
  $ npm run migrate-dev-up
  ```

- Seed (It might take couple of seconds till a message get printed `Seeding completed!`)

  ```sh
  $ node migrations\seed\script.js
  ```

- Run the project

  - Host: localhost
  - Port: 3000

  ```sh
  $ npm run start
  ```

- Run tests <br>
  **_PS_**: Testing database will not be dropped after runnint the tests.

  ```sh
  $ npm run test
  ```

- To drop the `dev` or `test` database (For whatever the reason is).

  ```sh
  $ npm run drop-dev-db

  or

  $ npm run drop-test-db

  ```

## Dockerization

This application is Dockerized for easy setup and deployment. Follow these steps to run the application using Docker:

1. **Prerequisites**:

   - Ensure Docker and Docker Compose are installed on your system. If not, install them from [Docker's official site](https://www.docker.com/get-started).

2. **Building the Docker Image**:

   - At the root of the project, run `docker-compose up --build`. This command builds the Docker image and starts the container based on the `docker-compose.yml` file.

3. **Running the Application**:

   - Once the build process is complete and the container is running, the application will be accessible at `http://localhost:3000`.

4. **Stopping the Application**:

   - To stop the application, use `Ctrl + C` in the terminal and then run `docker-compose down` to stop and remove the container.

5. **Using Docker in Development**:
   - For development purposes, use `docker-compose -f docker-compose.debug.yml up --build`. This will start the application in development mode, allowing for debugging and live updates.

## Endpoints

- Full API Documentation:
  [Go to the Documentation Page](https://documenter.getpostman.com/view/14046968/2s9YyqihQv#1cab5ea7-1cdd-4b37-9f95-e855ebc3e947)

| HTTP Method | Endpoint                                    | Description                                     | Access Control |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| POST        | `/books`                                    | Add a new book                                  | User           |
| GET         | `/books/all`                                | Retrieve all books                              | Public         |
| GET         | `/books/show/:id`                           | Retrieve a specific book by ID                  | Public         |
| GET         | `/books/search`                             | Search for a specific book                      | Public         |
| PATCH       | `/books/update/:id`                         | Update a specific book by ID                    | User           |
| DELETE      | `/books/delete/:id`                         | Delete a specific book by ID                    | User           |
| POST        | `/borrowers`                                | Register a new borrower                         | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowers/all`                            | Retrieve all borrowers                          | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowers/show/:id`                       | Retrieve a specific borrower by ID              | User           |
| PATCH       | `/borrowers/update/:id`                     | Update a specific borrower by ID                | User           |
| DELETE      | `/borrowers/delete/:id`                     | Delete a specific borrower by ID                | User           |
| POST        | `/borrowings`                               | Create a new borrowing record                   | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowings/all`                           | Retrieve all borrowing records                  | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowings/show/:id`                      | Retrieve a specific borrowing record by ID      | User           |
| PATCH       | `/borrowings/update/return/:id`             | Mark a book as returned in the borrowing record | User           |
| GET         | `/borrowings/export/overdue`                | Export overdue borrowings                       | Public         |
| GET         | `/borrowings/getOverdueBorrowings`          | Get overdue borrowing records                   | User           |
| POST        | `/users`                                    | Create a new user                               | Public         |
| POST        | `/users/authenticate`                       | Authenticate a user and return a token          | Public         |
| GET         | `/dashboard/most-borrowed-books`            | Get the most borrowed books                     | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/borrowers-with-most-borrowings` | Get borrowers with the most borrowings          | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/overdue-books`                  | Get overdue books                               | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/recent-borrowings`              | Get recent borrowings                           | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/available-checkedout`           | Compare available and checked out books         | User           |
| GET         | `/dashboard/late-Borrowers`                 | Get late return rate by borrower                | User           |

## Author

- Mostafa M. Abbas- (https://github.com/MostafaAbbas-git)

## About

Back-end Engineer Technical Assessment | Bosta
1/2024
